Cromfs - thoughts about write access

cromfs - Copyright (C) 1992,2009 Bisqwit (http://iki.fi/bisqwit/)
License: GPL3
Homepage: http://bisqwit.iki.fi/source/cromfs.html

--------------------------------

Cromfs is a read-only filesystem.
It is created once, and once created, it cannot be modified.
This is a fact. You can stop reading.

Now, the rest of this document is for dreamers.

This document lists the issues that hinder creating an effecient
write-access function for cromfs.

The source code extracts within this document are for conceptual
reference only.

--------------------------------------------------
1. Inodes are not fragmented

The block lists used by the file are stored in inode, and they
are stored in a contiguous array.

  pread64(fd, &blocklist[0], 4 * nblocks, offset+0x18)

Furthermore, the inodes are stored adjacently in the file, and
changing the number of blocks in one inode would require moving
all the following inodes forward or backward to accommodate that
change.
Because inode numbers are actually pointers into the inodes in
the inode table (INOTAB), the inode numbers of all the rest of
the files would need to be changed. The next file at least.

  read_file_data(INOTAB, (inodenum-2) * 4, Buf, 0x18, "inode")

To change the inode number of a file, the file would first
have to be located, which would require traversing the entire
directory tree, and changing the directories that contain the
file. Changing a directory is the same as changing a file btw.

If the number of block allocated by the file (length of file
within certain precision) does not change, this problem can
be ignored. This is similar to what the Linux NTFS driver does.

----------------------------------------
2. File content is stored in shared fblocks, with no reference counting
3. BLKTAB is not fragmented
4. Blocks are shared, with no reference counting

Each file (and directory and symlink) content is divided into
blocks, which are saved into various fblocks. To change the
content of a file, one needs to change those fblocks.

    std::memcpy(target, read_fblock(block.fblocknum)
                          [block.startoffs + offset], bytes);

The problem with changing the fblocks is that fblocks are shared
storage. Any particular byte could be shared, be portion of any
number of distinct files on the filesystem.

There is no reference counting in fblocks. No way of backtracking.
Blocks point to fblocks, not vice versa. The only way to find out
whether a particular section of a fblock is used by any other file
(i.e. whether it can be changed without affecting other files),
is to read through the whole block list (BLKTAB) of the filesystem
and check if they refer to that section in that fblock.
It is theoretically doable, though cpu-heavy work.
If it is solitary possession, it can be changed. All good.

However, it is just as possible that it cannot be changed.
And when it cannot be changed, the data must be written elsewhere.
Elsewhere means creating a new fblock. It can be appended to the
end of the file. This can be done. All good. However, one also
needs to create a new block, that tells where this data can be found.
The block must be added to the block table -- BLKTAB. Here it
becomes difficult.

BLKTAB is located in the middle of the file, and it cannot be fragmented.
In order to add a new entry to BLKTAB, one must give more room for it,
which involves moving the whole FBLKTAB section forward in the file.
It is an extremely disk-heavy operation. Doable, but super impractical.

It is possible that one does not need to create a new block -- one could
just reuse the same slot in the BLKTAB. However, this can only be done
if there is no longer any other file (or even a portion of the same
file itself) that refers to that block. To verify this fact, one would
need to decode each and every inode in the filesystem to see if they
refer to that block. There is no reference counting in the blocks.

----------------------------------------
Conclusion

It is possible to implement write access, but it would involve
reading and moving around tremendous amounts of data each time
a file is changed.
It may only be practical in mkcromfs, but even there it needs
to be planned _considerably_ well to prevent data corruption
that may happen on power outage or disk error.

---------------------------------------------
PLANS

    A write to a file involves the following (assume file size does not change):
     
     For each block that it covers:
     
     {

       Read the block to buffer
       
       Deallocate block
       
       Update the buffer according to the changes
       
       Allocate a new block
       
       Write the new block into the chosen fblock
          
       If the data locator was updated:
          
       {
          
         If the block number changed (because the
         same block was used by some other file):
         
         {
         
           If this file is INOTAB,
           {
             patch the INOTAB inode.
           }
           else
           {
             Perform recursively the change into the INOTAB file.
           }
         }
          
         Update BLKDATA.
         
       }
     
     }


FORMAT redesigns TODO:

    - Compressed fblocks must be resizeable.
      * Already implemented in CROMFS03, through sparse files.
      Sparseness avoids fragmentation while not costing disk space.
      (Note: This requires a host filesystem to be useful.)

    - Compressed BLKDATA must be resizeable.
      (Otherwise, files cannot be changed when the
       data locators are shared. And recompression
       may change size requirements.)

    - Compressed inotab must be resizeable.
      (Recompression may change size requirements.)
    
    - Compressed root directory must be resizeable.
      (Otherwise, root directory entries cannot be changed.)


To make files resizeable:

   Problem:
     Change in file size incurs a change in the length of
     the block list in the inode. There's no room growing
     the list. To grow the list, the inode needs to be moved
     into a different location within INOTAB.
     However, since the inode number is actually an address
     of the inode within INOTAB, changing the location also
     changes the inode number. This would incur another write
     into the directory entry, and possibly a whole bunch of
     other writes.
   For performance, it would be nice if inode numbers don't
   need to change.
   
   To accomplish that, there are two options:
     A) Fragment the inodes.
     B) Maintain a separate table that maps the inode
       numbers into INOTAB offsets.

